doc: guides: Add a TF-M guide (#37050)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/guides/tfm/overview.rst

    │ │          ││                     │ │           │ │          │ │
    │ └──────────┘└─────────────────────┘ │           │ └──────────┘ │
    └─────────────────────────────────────┘           └──────────────┘

Communication between the (Zephyr) Non-Secure Processing Environment (NSPE) and
the (TF-M) Secure Processing Environment image happens based on a set of PSA
APIs, and normally makes use of an IPC mechanism that is included as part of
the TF-M build, and implemented in Zephyr
(see ``zephyr/modules/trusted-firmware-m/interface``).

Root of Trust (RoT) Architecture
================================

TF-M is based upon a **Root of Trust (RoT)** architecture. This allows for
hierarchies of trust from most, to less, to least trusted, providing a sound
foundation upon which to build or access trusted services and resources.

The benefit of this approach is that less trusted components are prevented from
accessing or compromising more critical parts of the system, and error
conditions in less trusted environments won't corrupt more trusted, isolated
resources.

The following RoT hierarchy is defined for TF-M, from most to least trusted:

> * PSA Root of Trust (**PRoT**), which consists of:
>   * PSA Immutable Root of Trust: secure boot
>   * PSA Updateable Root of Trust: most trusted secure services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PSA Root of Trust (**PRoT**), which consists of:

  * PSA Immutable Root of Trust: secure boot
  * PSA Updateable Root of Trust: most trusted secure services
```

This requires an extra newline to render properly as nested HTML lists.

* Application Root of Trust (**ARoT**): isolated secure services

The **PSA Immutable Root of Trust** is the most trusted piece of code in the
system, to which subsequent Roots of Trust are anchored. In TF-M, this is the
secure boot image, which verifies that the secure and non-secure images are
valid, have not been tampered with, and come from a reliable source. The
secure bootloader also verifies new images during the firmware update process,
thanks to the public signing key(s) built into it. As the name implies,
this image is **immutable**.

The **PSA Updateable Root of Trust** implements the most trusted secure
services and components in TF-M, such as the Secure Partition Manager (SPM),
and shared secure services like PSA Crypto, Internal Trusted Storage (ITS),
etc. Services in the PSA Updateable Root of Trust have access to other
resources in the same Root of Trust.

The **Application Root of Trust** is a reduced-privilege area in the secure

> processing environment which, depenending on the isolation level chosen when

Reviewer 2: s/depenending/depending/

Author: Fixed

  2 by isolating ARoT services from each other, so that each ARoT is
  essentially silo'ed from other services. This provides the highest level of
  isolation, but also comes at the cost of additional overhead and code
  duplication between services.

The current isolation level can be checked via
:kconfig:`CONFIG_TFM_ISOLATION_LEVEL`.

Secure Boot
===========

The default secure bootloader in TF-M is based on
`MCUBoot <https://www.mcuboot.com/>`__, and is referred to as ``BL2`` in TF-M
(for the second-stage bootloader, potentially after a HW-based bootloader on
the secure MCU, etc.).

All images in TF-M are hashed and signed, with the hash and signature verified
by MCUBoot during the firmware update process.

Some key features of MCUBooot as used in TF-M are:

* Public signing key(s) are baked into the bootloader
* S and NS images can be signed using different keys
* Firmware images can optionally be encyrpted
* Client software is responsible for writing a new image to the secondary slot
* By default, uses static flash layout of two identically-sized memory regions
* Optional security counter for rollback protection

> When dealing with (optionally) encyrpted images:

Reviewer 2: s/encyrpted/encrypted/

Author: Fixed

* Only the payload is encrypted (header, TLVs are plain text)
* Hashing and signing are applied over the un-encrypted data
* Uses ``AES-CTR-128`` or ``AES-CTR-256`` for encryption
* Encryption key randomized every encryption cycle (via ``imgtool``)
* The ``AES-CTR`` key is included in the image and can be encrypted using:

>   * ``RSA-OAEP``

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  * ``RSA-OAEP``
```

Same here.

  * ``AES-KW`` (128 or 256 bits depending on the ``AES-CTR`` key length)
  * ``ECIES-P256``
  * ``ECIES-X25519``

Key config properties to control secure boot in Zephyr are:

* :kconfig:`CONFIG_TFM_BL2` toggles the bootloader (default = ``y``).
* :kconfig:`CONFIG_TFM_KEY_FILE_S` overrides the secure signing key.
* :kconfig:`CONFIG_TFM_KEY_FILE_NS` overrides the non-secure signing key.

Secure Processing Environment
=============================

Once the secure bootloader has finished executing, a TF-M based secure image
will begin execution in the **secure processing environment**. This is where
our device will be initially configured, and any secure services will be
initialised.

Note that the starting state of our device is controlled by the secure firmware,
meaning that when the non-secure Zephyr application starts, peripherals may
not be in the HW-default reset state. In case of doubts, be sure to consult
the board support packages in TF-M, available in the ``platform/ext/target/``

> folder of TF-M (``modules/tee/tfm/trusted-firmware-m/``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
folder of the TF-M module (which is in ``modules/tee/tfm/trusted-firmware-m/``
within a default Zephyr west workspace.)
```

Secure Services
---------------

As of TF-M 1.3.0, the following secure services are available:

* Audit Logging (Audit)
* Crypto (Crypto)
* Firmware Update (FWU)
* Initial Attestation (IAS)
* Secure Storage, which has two parts:

>   * Internal Trusted Storage (ITS)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  * Internal Trusted Storage (ITS)
```

The **Internal Trusted Storage** service in TF-M is used by the **PSA Crypto**
service (which itself makes use of mbedtls) to store keys, and ensure that
private keys are only ever accessible to the secure processing environment.
Crypto operations that make use of key material, such as when signing payloads
or when decrypting sensitive data, all take place via key handles. At no point
should the key material ever be exposed to the NS environment.

One exception is that private keys can be provisioned into the secure
processing environment as a one-way operation, such as during a factory
provisioning process, but even this should be avoided where possible, and a
request should be made to the SPE (via the PSA Crypto service) to generate a
new private key itself, and the public key for that can be requested during
provisioning and logged in the factory. This ensures the private key
material is never exposed, or even known during the provisioning phase.

TF-M also makes extensive use of the **Hardware Unique Key (HUK)**, which
every TF-M device must provide. This device-unique key is used by the
**Protected Storage** service, for example, to encrypt information stored in

> external memory, such that removing the memory and placing it on a new device,
> the contents of flash memory can't be decrypted since each device has it's own
> unique HUK used while encrypted the memory contents the first time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
external memory. For example, this ensures that the contents of flash memory
can't be decrypted if they are removed and placed on a new device, since each
device has its own unique HUK used while encrypting the memory contents
the first time.
```

I had a hard time parsing this the first time I read it. Maybe something like this?

> HUKs provide an additional advantage for developpers, in that they can be used

Reviewer 2: s/developpers/developers/

Author: Fixed

to derive new keys, and the **derived keys** don't need to be stored since
they can be regenerated from the HUK at startup, using an additional salt/seed
value (depending on the key derivation algorithm used). This removes the
storage issue and a frequent attack vector. The HUK itself it usually highly
protected in secure devices, and inaccessible directly by users.

``TFM_CRYPTO_ALG_HUK_DERIVATION`` identifies the default key derivation
algorithm used if a software implementation is used. The current default
algorithm is ``HKDF`` (RFC 5869) with a SHA-256 hash. Other hardware
implementations may be available on some platforms.

Non-Secure Processing Environment
=================================

Zephyr is used for the NSPE, using a board that is supported by TF-M where the
:kconfig:`CONFIG_BUILD_WITH_TFM` flag has been enabled.

Generally, you simply need to select the ``*_ns`` variant of a valid target
(for example ``mps2_an521_ns``), which will configure your Zephyr application
to run in the NSPE, correctly build and link it with the TF-M secure images,
sign the secure and non-secure images, and merge the three binaries into a

> single ``tfm_merged.hex`` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
single ``tfm_merged.hex`` file. The :ref:`west flash <west-flashing>` command
will flash ``tfm_merged.hex`` by default in this configuration.
```

Knowing this would have saved me a few hairs the first time I was trying to use nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp_ns.
